# Nextcloud end-to-end encryption

## Introduction
With the announcement of the Nextcloud end-to-end encryption techpreview, we would like to invite you to scrutinize our source code and cryptographic approach.

Please note that end-to-end encryption feature is a work-in-progress and this document may describe functionalities or approaches not yet implemented in our testing releases. 
This document is meant as authoritative implementation guideline for our clients. 
For the sake of having smaller and incremental steps towards the final implementation we are going to continuously release updated builds of our clients.

We are looking forward to your input to refine our approach towards client side encryption. 
In addition, we will also make sure to validate our approach on-time by external cryptographic experts.

## Protocol design goals
The end-to-end encryption has to fulfill the following business and technical criteria.

### Usage of widely available and tested libraries for crypto primitives
We believe that for security-sensitive functionalities relying on existing and proven libraries is an essential requirement. 
Thus we require that:

* The used library for cryptographic primitives must be in use widely.
* The used library for cryptographic primitives has undergone successful security audits.

Also due to our wide range of supported systems, the library must be available for the following of our supported environments:

* iOS 9+
* Android 6.0+
* Mac OS X 10.9+
* Windows 7+
* commonly used Linux distributions
* PHP 7.0+

_**Note:** While we do not have any current plans to add support for potential server-side decryption we want to keep this possibility open for the future._

### Sharing functionality
Existing client-side encryption solutions often prevent the sharing of encrypted files, the Nextcloud end-to-end encryption must offer support for the following sharing scenarios:

* Sharing encrypted folders with other users
* Any user that is part of the shared folder is able to add new users to the share

The following sharing scenarios are considered out of-scope:

* Sharing single files or folders from an encrypted folder
* Sharing encrypted folders with whole groups
* Sharing subfolders of encrypted folders is not possible

### Optional central data recovery
While End-to-End encryption is meant to prevent access to data for other parties the reality is: People may lose their encryption keys.

While in a home user environment this might be acceptable, in an enterprise this can have grave implications.
Thus an optional central data recovery has to be available offering the following capabilities:

* Central recovery key per instance can be generated
* Central recovery key must not be stored on the instance and can be safely exported (e.g. to be stored in a physical vault)
* All data will also be encrypted with the central recovery key when enabled
* Users must be prominently warned in the UI of their clients if a central data recovery key is enabled
* When a central data recovery key is enabled the existing end-to-end encrypted folders must not be affected

### Simple multi-device management
Access to encrypted data should easily be possible from any device the end-user owns, this includes all mobile devices as well as desktop devices.

Thus:
* Sharing keys between existing devices must be frictionless
* Newly added devices should have access to all previously encrypted data

### Simple authenticated key exchange
Key exchange is a key problem of any cryptographic system.
On one hand one wants to ensure that the key of the participating parties is authentic.
On the other hand, manual comparison of key material is cumbersome and rarely something that regular users can be bothered to do.

A secure and yet simple system has to implement the following properties:
* Key exchange between parties should be frictionless
* Optionally, clients can offer key verification by comparing certificate fingerprints (e.g. by using QR-Codes)

### Support for HSM
To fulfill enterprise security requirements it should be possible that key material is generated by a hardware security module.
Thus offering strong authentication, tampering resistance and a complete audit trail.

### Versioning
The protocol has to support versioning in case of future changes in the metadata or cryptographic parameters.

## Accepted feature loss
Since the data is not accessible to the server and to simplify the implementation, losing following features is acceptable:

* Server-side trash bin
* Server-side versioning
* Server-side search
* Server-side previews
* Access to folders via web interface
* Sharing to groups
* Sharing at the level of individual files
* Sharing of subfolders of an encrypted folder. It is only possible to share topmost encrypted folder

## Security goals
### Attacker model
The end-to-end encryption must protect against an attacker with following capabilities:

* Attacker can circumvent underlying TLS/SSL transport encryption
* Attacker has full control over the server (e.g. compromised server or malicious admin)
* Attacker cannot tamper with key exchange between clients and with initial connection of a new client to a share (Trust on first use (TOFU))
  * Future support for separate trusted key server could avoid the TOFU compromise and therefore protect against a stronger attacker.
* Removed users: A user who is part of a shared end-to-end encrypted folder is trusted until the user has been removed

### Goals
The protocol must achieve following goals when assuming an attacker as specified above.

* Access to ciphertext must not leak file content nor file names nor the names of subfolders.
  * Leaking the number of files in an encrypted folder is an accepted risk.
  * Leaking the name of the topmost encrypted folder is an accepted risk.
  * Leaking which file operation has been performed on files in an encrypted folder is an accepted risk.
* Once a user has been removed from an encrypted folder they should have no relevant key material to decrypt files updated or created in the future
* **Confidentiality**: No one, except the legitimate recipients, must have access to the encrypted documents.
* **Integrity**: Even with writable access to the ciphertext one must not be able to tamper with the data unnoticed.
    In case the number of files referenced in the encrypted metadata differs from the number of files on the file system, a warning should be displayed to the user.
* **Authentication**: all valid changes (uploading new files, changing existing files, removing existing files) to an end-to-end encrypted folder must only be made by a user who is part of the (shared) folder. 
   Malicious changes are detected at the latest when the client that made the most recent valid change synchronizes the next time.

## Technical implementation
The encryption is based upon an asymmetric cryptographic system.
The following steps will walk through the technical implementation of the encryption.

### Terminology
* Device: a device can be anything able to run one of our supported clients.
* file-metadata: cleartext name, mimetype, file-key, nonce/iv and authTag of a file
* file-key: the actual key used to encrypt the file
* folders-array: associative array mapping random identifiers names to folder name
* files-array: associative array mapping random identifiers names to the (encrypted) metadata of the file
* recipients-array: array of information of recipients. Used to list the users of a shared and encrypted folder, with their certificate and the encrypted metadata key
* metadata-key: key used to encrypt the metadata of the folder
* metadata: metadata of all files (file-metadata) and sub-folders in the encrypted folder, list of checksums of metadata-keys and a counter

### Adding an end-to-end encrypted device
When requesting the server certificate and when adding a new device of a user, we assume that the server is trusted (TOFU).
As a first step, a device has to be added to an account.
Depending on whether an end-to-end encrypted device already has been added to an account, the device will have to create new key material or use existing key material.

To check whether a certificate has already been issued or not the `/ocs/v2.php/apps/end_to_end_encryption/api/v1/public-key` endpoint should be used. 
In addition, the client has to download the server’s public certificate from `/ocs/v2.php/apps/end_to_end_encryption/api/v1/server-key` and use this to verify the certificate chain in all future operations.

#### Initial device
When a device is initially added to an account the device has to generate all relevant key material for the user account and provision those on the server:

1. Client has to generate a new X.509 certificate request and private key (TODO: check if we want/need to use PEM, otherwise base64 encode)
  1. CN of X.509 certificate must be set to the currently logged-in User ID
2. Client uploads the X.509 certificate request to the server by sending the certificate request URL encoded as parameter `csr` to `/ocs/v2.php/apps/end_to_end_encryption/api/v1/public-key`.
3. Server issues a certificate if the CN matches the current user ID
4. Server returns the issued certificate
5. Client stores the private key and the certificate in the keychain of the device

In a second step, the private key will be stored encrypted on the server to simplify the addition of further devices:

1. Client generates a 12 word long mnemonic from the English BIP-0039 word list. The word list contains 2048 words, thus resulting in 2048^12 possible key combinations.
2. Client encrypts the private key using AES/GCM/NoPadding as cipher (256 bit key size) and uses PBKDF2WithHmacSHA1 as key derivation with 1024 iterations, as password the in step 1 generated mnemonic is used. 
Salt is 40 randomly generated byte. TODO: check if we want/need to use PEM, otherwise base64 encode private key
3. Client uploads the encrypted private key, salt, nonce and authenticationTag to the server by sending this as JSON payload to `/ocs/v2.php/apps/end_to_end_encryption/api/v1/private-key`:
```
{
  "encryptedKey" : "uLWMU9GNO8pRz+8IcDAeh8i37mms…E=",
  "salt" : "I3xgQrY95PZ94vrtviV6suELuuOnEQJQvFdCoM4WqTv7fXlXZO1Duw==",
  "nonce" : "hMysT5Qt7vcgyfNp",
  "authenticationTag" : "Ae7JkWFfaRR4vPFLcUkF7g=="
}
```
4. The mnemonic is displayed to the user as a space separated text and the user is asked to note it down in a secure place. 
   For encrypting/decrypting the mnemonic must have no white space and be lowercase.
5. The mnemonic is stored in the keychain of the device with spaces so it can be shown more readable.

In case a user loses their device, they can easily recover by using the mnemonic passphrase. 
The mnemonic passphrase can also be shown in the client settings in case the user forgets their mnemonic. 
Displaying the mnemonic requires the user to enter their PIN/fingerprint again on mobile devices.

#### Further devices
In case a certificate already exists for the user the client has to download the existing private key. 
This is done the following way:

1. Client downloads private key from the `/ocs/v2.php/apps/end_to_end_encryption/api/v1/private-key` endpoint.
2. Client asks the user for the mnemonic and decrypts the private key using AES/GCM/NoPadding as cipher (256 bit key size) and PBKDF2WithHmacSHA1 as key derivation. 
3. Client checks if private key belongs to previously downloaded public certificate.
4. Client stores the private key in the keychain of the device.
5. The mnemonic is stored with spaces in the keychain of the device.

### Creating an end-to-end encrypted folder
To create an end-to-end encrypted folders multiple steps have to be performed.
First of all, data access to such folders happens via our regular WebDAV API available at `/remote.php/dav/$userId/files`.

#### Mark folder as end-to-end encrypted
After creating a folder via WebDAV the folder has to be flagged as end-to-end encrypted.
This can be performed by sending a PUT request to `/ocs/v2.php/apps/end_to_end_encryption/api/v1/encrypted/<folder-id>` where `<folder-id>` has to be the folder ID indicated by our WebDAV API.

Once this flag has been set the folder will not be accessible anymore via web and also not displayed to regular WebDAV clients.
Only empty folders can be marked as end-to-end encrypted.
Once a folder is marked as encrypted, it cannot be marked as unencrypted again.

#### Create metadata file
Every folder contains a metadata file containing the following information:

* metadata of all files (file-metadata) and sub-folders
* list of checksums of metadata-keys
* recipients array
* counter

The metadata is a JSON document with the following structure depicted below.
We use a notation with inline comments (`//`) for better readability.
Note that comments are not available in standalone JSON and only used here for better understanding.

In case the central data recovery key is enabled the metadata will also be encrypted with the servers central data recovery key.
Clients must show a prominent warning to the users for such scenarios.

```
{
  "metadata": {
    "ciphertext": "encrypted metadata of folder (see below for the plaintext structure).
                first gzipped, then encrypted, then base64 encoded.",
    "nonce": "123",
    "authenticationTag": "123"
  }
  "recipients": [ 
     // The following contains the reference to all users who have access to the share.
     // The metadata-key is encrypted with RSA/ECB/OAEPWithSHA-256AndMGF1Padding
    { 
      "userId": "testUser"
      "certificate": "public key of this user",
      "encryptedMetadataKey": "encrypted metadata-key then base64"
    }
  ],
  "version": 1, 
}
```

Metadata:
```
{
  "keyChecksums": [ "list of hashes of metadata-keys" ],
  "deleted": "true/false",
  "counter": 12,
  "folders": [
    "<uid>": "cleartext name", 
    "<uid>": "cleartext name 2"
  ],
  "files": [ 
     "<uid>": {
        // Unencrypted file name
        "filename": "test.txt",
        // Mimetype. If unknown, use "application/octet-stream"
        "mimetype": "plain/text",
        // Encryption algorithm: AES/GCM/NoPadding (128 bit key size)
        "nonce": ""
        "authenticationTag": ""
        "key": "jtboLmgGR1OQf2uneqCVHpklQLlIwWL5TXAQ0keK"
      }
  ]
}
```

When creating a new folder, an initial metadata file needs to be created with following values
- counter starts with 0
- generate a new metadata key
- if folder is topmost encrypted folder, the recipients array contains the current user with userId, certificate and encrypted metadata key
- if folder is a subfolder of an encrypted folder, the recipients-array is not included

The metadata has to be created by sending a POST request to `/ocs/v2.php/apps/end_to_end_encryption/api/v1/meta-data/<folder-id>`, where `<folder-id>` has to be the folder ID indicated by our WebDAV API. 
The POST parameter `metaData` with the encrypted metadata has to be used.

### Signing the metadata
Signature: CMS signed data, according to RFC5652
- certificate of user
- Signed data:
    - create byte array of JSON binary and decrypted metadata key
    - SignerIdentifier of the CMS container contains userId of the user who created the signature

The encoded binary CMS structure is base64-encoded and sent in the header of the metadata request.
The Section [Uploading payload and metadata](#uploading-payload-and-metadata-file-step-5--8) further describes how the signature is handled.

### Verifying the metadata
Before using the metadata file, e.g. on a folder refresh the client has to verify the signature.
The client has to find its metadata-key in the `recipients` list and decrypt it.
Then the client passes the JSON binary and the decrypted metadata-key to the verification algorithm.

If any of the following checks fail, the client needs to refuse further sync and informs the user:
- check counter: new counter must be greater than locally stored counter
- check signature
- check that hash of metadata-key is in keyChecksums
- check that no hash has been removed from the keyChecksums
- check if cert of all recipients is issued by the CA

### Modifying and accessing content of an end-to-end encrypted folder
In general, clients need to perform two steps to modify the content of an end-to-end encrypted folder.
Firstly, clients upload, modify or delete the actual files via the WebDAV API and secondly modify the metadata JSON accordingly.

#### Modifying content of end-to-end encrypted folders
The following steps are required to create, update, delete files of an end-to-end encrypted folder.
If any of the following steps failed, show a verbose warning to the user, unlock the folder and abort.

1. Make a backup of file to be modified and metadata file, so that in case of any upload problems the client can revert to a consistent state.
2. Detect topmost folder which needs to be changed
  1. Increase counter of the metadata of this folder
  2. Lock the folder with increased counter passed as header X-NC-E2EE-COUNTER
3. Check for changes in the encrypted folder.
  1. if current version is up to date, go to next step 4.
  2. If not current,
    - get the latest metadata file
    - verify metadata file
    - decrypt metadata file
    - check if file operation is still possible (e.g. file to be renamed can already be deleted)
4. Perform specific steps to create/update/delete file or folder:
    * Create new file:
      1. Generate a new 128-bit encryption key for the file and encrypt it using AES/GCM/NoPadding
      2. Generate a new 96-bit IV for the file
      3. Encrypt the file using the key and IV with AES/GCM/NoPadding
      4. Create new random identifier by generating a random UUID and removing the dash (`-`). The identifier must follow `/^[0-9a-fA-F]{32}$/` TODO: use a better id, or ignore "-"
      5. Add new file to the files array in the metadata file with UUID as identifier and 
        - filename
        - encryption key
        - nonce
        - authenticationTag
        - mimetype
    * Rename existing file:
      1. Change filename in files array, the encrypted file remains unchanged.
    * Update existing file:
      1. Generate a new 128-bit encryption key for the file and encrypt it using AES/GCM/NoPadding
      2. Generate a new 96-bit IV for the file
      3. Update the metadata of the file in the files-array
      4. Use the existing random identifier for the encrypted file when uploading it via WebDAV
      5. Encrypt the file using the key and IV with AES/GCM/NoPadding
      6. Use the existing random identifier for the file and upload the encrypted file via WebDAV using the existing random identifier as file ID
      7. Update the file in the files array of the metadata with updated
        - key
        - IV
        - authenticationTag
    * Delete file:
      1. Remove the corresponding entry from the files array
    * Move file into subfolder:
      1. Remove file from files array in metadata file of source folder and add it to metadata files array in target folder
      2. Steps 6-8 need to be done for source and target folder
    * Copy file into subfolder: 
      1. Same like create new file, to prevent having the same encryption key and nonce for two different files
    * Create new subfolder:
      1. Create new random identifier by generating a random UUID and removing the dash (`-`). The identifier must follow `/^[0-9a-fA-F]{32}$/`
      2. Add folder to folders array in the metadata file
    * Rename existing subfolder:
      1. Change filename in folders array, the encrypted subfolder remains unchanged
    * Delete subfolder:
      1. Remove the corresponding entry form the folders array
      2. Issue a DELETE request to /ocs/v2.php/apps/end_to_end_encryption/api/v1/meta-data/<folder-id>
    * Move subfolder into another subfolder:
      1. Remove folder from folders array in metadata file of source folder and add it to metadata folders array in target folder
      2. Steps 6-8 needs to be done for source and target folder
      3. TODO request to E2E API: move folder
    * Copy subfolder into another subfolder:
      1. Recursively add new folders and new files, everything needs to be re-encrypted to prevent having the same encryption key and nonce for two different files
      2. Steps 6-8 needs to be done for every source and target folder
         TODO Operation might be too big to handle on mobile
    * Delete topmost encrypted folder
      1. Set deleted to true in metadata array
      2. empty files and folders array
5. Upload modified/new encrypted file/folder, or delete the file/folder via WebDAV
6. Encrypt the metadata using metadata-key
7. Sign the metadata as described [above](#signing-the-metadata)
8. Upload encrypted metadata 
9. Unlock the folder

#### Uploading payload and metadata file (step 5 & 8)
To keep the metadata and the file in sync locking is required.
The client needs to lock the topmost encrypted (sub-)folder which needs to be changed and pass the counter as header.
The server checks if the incremented counter is a direct successor of the currently stored counter, if not it will fail with HTTP status code 409 Conflict.
If the lock operation succeeded, the server responds with HTTP status code 200 together with a token in the response body.
In case the client lost connection after locking the folder, it can restart the operation later with another "lock" request.
In this case the client must send the token with the new lock call.
This enables the server to decide if the client is allowed to retry the upload.

After locking was successful, the client will
- upload the encrypted file
- upload the metadata file with signature as header

After both files are uploaded successfully the client will finish the operation by sending an unlock request.

The `<folder-id>` denotes the ID of the end-to-end encrypted folder given by the WebDAV API.

To lock the folder a POST request to `/ocs/v2.php/apps/end_to_end_encryption/api/v1/lock/<folder-id>` has to be sent with the incremented counter as header X-NC-E2EE-COUNTER.
To use an existing lock token it can be sent as `token` parameter.

To update the metadata a PUT request to `/ocs/v2.php/apps/end_to_end_encryption/api/v1/meta-data/<folder-id>` has to be sent.
The computed signature needs to be sent as header X-NC-E2EE-SIGNATURE.
The request requires following two parameters:
* The `token` contains the current lock token
* The `metadata` contains the encrypted metadata JSON.

To unlock the folder a DELETE request to `/ocs/v2.php/apps/end_to_end_encryption/api/v1/lock/<folder-id>` has to be sent.
The previously received lock token has to be sent as `token` parameter.
If this fails, the client has to make sure that it retries or revert the upload so that the folder is then again in an unlocked and consistent state.

#### Detect encrypted folder
##### Encrypted folder gets added
- WebDAV endpoints lists folder with parameter encryption set to true
- client shows lock symbol when listing folder
- client refuses to update encryption status to false as this is not allowed.
  If server sends such an information the client has to warn the user.
- upon entering an encrypted folder the client continues with [Accessing encrypted files](#accessing-encrypted-files)

##### Encrypted folder gets deleted
If WebDAV endpoints does not list an encrypted folder anymore, the client has to check if this is a valid delete.
Therefore, the client has to request /ocs/v2.php/apps/end_to_end_encryption/api/v1/meta-data/<folder-id> and validate the metadata file and check if `deleted` is set to true.
Otherwise, the client needs to display warning that the folder was maliciously deleted and refuse to delete the locally synced content.

#### Accessing encrypted files
No locking is required to read files of an encrypted folder.
If the folder is locked due to an ongoing upload, the server responds with HTTP status code 423 Locked.
The client can then present the currently stored files alongside with a warning and disable on mobile or postpone on desktop the possibility to do any file operation.
To access encrypted files the client has to do the following steps:

1. Check for changes in the encrypted folder. 
   If not current, get the latest metadata file.
2. Download actual metadata of encrypted folder
3. Verify & decrypt the metadata file
4. Loop over files array and decrypt the array with the newest metadata key
5. Download the referenced files using WebDAV
6. Decrypt the file
    1. Get the key from the metadata file
    2. Get the IV from the metadata file
    3. Get the authenticationTag from the metadata file
    4. Decrypt using AES/GCM/NoPadding (128bit) using the key and IV
    5. Validate decryption using authenticationTag

In case a file is referenced in the metadata but cannot be found on the WebDAV file system the user should be warned about this.
If the file exists locally but not on the file system the client should re-upload the file.

### Sharing encrypted folders to other users
#### Key discovery of other users
As a PKI approach for encryption is used, every certificate is issued by a central root authority.
By default, the Nextcloud server acts as a root authority and issues the certificates from the CSRs.

The clients do the following when trying to establish a trust relationship to another user:

1. Check if a certificate for the specified user ID is already downloaded (Trust On First Use (TOFU))
   1. If a certificate is available, it will be used
   2. If none is available, the client will continue at 2.
2. Query the user certificate by sending GET request to the `/ocs/v2.php/apps/end_to_end_encryption/api/v1/public-key` endpoint and sending a JSON encoded `users` parameter containing the specified UIDs
3. If the user has not yet set up E2E and thus no public key, it will not be possible to share with the user. 
   A warning should then be shown.
4. Verify that the certificate is issued by the downloaded server public key.
   1. If yes: Use this one.
   2. If no: Show a warning that initiating an encrypted share is not possible to the user.
5. Store the user certificate locally for next operations

#### Add someone to an end-to-end encrypted folder
To create a share the following actions have to be performed:

1. The file has to be shared via the [OCS](https://docs.nextcloud.com/server/13/developer_manual/core/ocs-share-api.html) sharing API to the recipient
2. Generate a new metadata key
3. The recipient is added to the recipients array with
  - userId
  - certificate
4. Add/replace the new metadata-key of every recipient in the recipients-list. 
   The metadata-key is encrypted with the recipient's public key.
5. The SHA-256 hash of the metadata-key is added to the keyChecksum array.

#### Remove someone from an existing share
To remove someone from an existing share the following actions have to be performed:

1. The file has to be unshared via the [OCS](https://docs.nextcloud.com/server/13/developer_manual/core/ocs-share-api.html) sharing API to the recipient
2. A new metadata-key must be generated
3. The recipient is removed from the recipients array
4. Add/replace the new metadata-key to every recipient in the recipients-list. 
   The metadata-key is encrypted with the recipient's public key.
5. The SHA-256 hash of metadata key is added to keyChecksum array.

### Edge cases
#### Handling of complete key material loss
Right now a complete key material loss means that other users that already had a share with the user will not be able to share new encrypted folders since the protocol uses TOFU for initiating shares.

However, considering the fact that the user has a mnemonic passphrase to recover their key and any connected device (e.g. their smartphones) also has a way to recover the mnemonic we consider this an edge-case at the moment.

We are investigating how a CSR approach here could help in such edge-cases at least to allow new share again.

## Possible extensions

### Manual key verification
The clients could expose QR-codes of their public keys to make manual verification of other users' public keys possible.

### Hardware security module (HSM)
A HSM would act as trusted third party and would eliminate the Nextcloud server from the key exchange process completely.
I.e. it could replace trust on first use with a central trusted certificate authority (CA).
The CA also would make key revocation possible with a certificate revocation list CRLs or OCSP.
To implement CRLs the clients would always check if a key was revoked before they encrypt something with a given key.

## Implementation details

### Private key
* 2048 RSA key

### AES+GCM
* saltLength: 40 bytes
* PBKDF2 key derivation iterations: 1024 TODO: check if we can increase to >=10.000
* keyLength: 32 bytes (256 bit)

## Scenarios

### Regular operations

#### move folder from subfolder into another
- /enc/folderA/test shall be moved into /enc/folderA/subfolderB/
- topmost folder is in that case folderA, so this needs to be locked and other subfolders of /enc are still accessible
- metadata of /enc/folderA and /enc/folderA/subfolderB needs to be handled correctly, e.g. with counter

- /enc/folderA/test shall be moved into /enc/folderB/
- topmost folder is in that case /enc, so this needs to be locked, thus complete encrypted directory is locked

### Attack scenarios

#### replay attack
- An attacker reverts metadata file and payload to any previous state (e.g. malicious admin).
- upon next sync at least the client with the latest sync can detect this attack by checking the counter
- there will always be at least one client that has the latest sync state (the client which issued the latest change)
- limitation: 
    - it can happen that the client with the latest sync state is offline and thus the detection will be delayed. 
      In the worst case scenario it will never be detected, if the client never syncs again
    - meanwhile other clients cannot detect the replay attack and will do file/folder operations as usual
- No encrypted data can be decrypted by this attacker 

#### removed sharee tries to re-add itself
Given a share with User A, B and C.
User C is removed by User A at a later time.
User C now tries to gain access to the share again by first adding itself via Nextcloud share API.
User C adds itself to recipients array of metadata file again.
User A/B can now detect the malicious attack as the hash of the latest metadata is not in keyChecksums.

#### User with valid certificate tries to add himself
In this scenario the attacker is a valid user of the Nextcloud instance and therefore has a certificate issued by the Nextcloud server or trusted CA.
Main idea of the attack:
- Attacker adds himself to the recipients list and waits until a new metadata key is used.
- The new metadata-key will be encrypted with the public key of the attacker

This attack is prohibited by the signature on the metadata file and the metadata key.
The attacker cannot create a valid signature, because he does not know the metadata key, which is necessary to create the signature.

Upon next sync, the other clients detect the bad signature.

#### Attacker deletes topmost folder and/or metadata file on server
- Attacker deletes on server either metadata file, WebDAV folder or both
- Client detects on next sync
- if metadata file is missing or corrupt, then client warns user and refuses to delete local content
- if folder is missing on WebDAV endpoint, client downloads the latest metadata file and check for deleted flag
- if deleted flag is set to true, the client accepts this as a regular folder deletion
- if metadata file and WebDAV files are missing, client warns user and refuses to delete local content

#### Attacker advertises new share as unencrypted to a new sharee instead of encrypted
- we cannot guarantee encryption status on shared folder for a new sharee, because of the TOFU assumption.
- the user is responsible to make a plausible check if folder name and context of the files/folder should be encrypted and detect such a scenario
